---
generator: 'WordPress 4.5.1'
title: After 5th semester of statistics PhD program | Civil Statistician
twitter:card: summary
...

<div id="container" class="hfeed contain">

<div id="header">

<div id="masthead" role="banner">

<div id="site-title">

<span> [Civil Statistician](http://civilstat.com/ "Civil Statistician")
</span>

</div>

<div id="site-description">

Stats, datavis, edu, brains, etc.

</div>

</div>

<div id="access" role="navigation">

<div class="skip-link screen-reader-text">

[Skip to content](#content "Skip to content")

</div>

<div class="menu">

-   [Home](http://civilstat.com/)
-   [About / Portfolio](http://civilstat.com/about/)
-   [Dataviz Books](http://civilstat.com/dataviz-books/)
-   [Stats Edu and Jobs](http://civilstat.com/stats-edu-and-jobs/)
-   [useR 2012](http://civilstat.com/user-2012/)

</div>

</div>

<div id="branding">

[![](http://civilstat.com/wp-content/uploads/2012/02/cropped-cappa-1.jpg)](http://civilstat.com/)

</div>

</div>

<div id="content-box">

<div id="content-container">

<div id="content" role="main">

<div id="nav-above" class="navigation">

<div class="nav-previous">

[<span class="meta-nav">←</span> Tapestry 2016 conference: short stories
and
wrap-up](http://civilstat.com/2016/03/tapestry-2016-conference-short-stories-and-wrap-up/)

</div>

<div class="nav-next">

</div>

</div>

<div id="post-2248"
class="post-2248 post type-post status-publish format-standard hentry category-education category-statistics">

After 5th semester of statistics PhD program {.entry-title}
============================================

<div class="entry-meta">

<span class="meta-prep meta-prep-author">Posted on</span> [<span
class="entry-date">April 21,
2016</span>](http://civilstat.com/2016/04/after-5th-semester-of-statistics-phd-program/ "10:19 pm")
<span class="comments-link"><span class="meta-sep">|</span> [Leave a
comment](http://civilstat.com/2016/04/after-5th-semester-of-statistics-phd-program/#respond)</span>

</div>

<div class="entry-content">

Better late than never—here are my hazy memories of last semester. It
was one of the tougher ones: an intense teaching experience, attempts to
ratchet up research, and parenting a baby that’s still too young to
entertain itself but old enough to get into trouble.

Previous posts: the
[1st](http://civilstat.com/2014/02/after-1st-semester-of-statistics-phd-program/),
[2nd](http://civilstat.com/2014/05/after-2nd-semester-of-statistics-phd-program/),
[3rd](http://civilstat.com/2014/12/after-3rd-semester-of-statistics-phd-program/),
and
[4th](http://civilstat.com/2015/06/after-4th-semester-of-statistics-phd-program/)
semesters of my Statistics PhD program.

Classes
=======

I’m past all the required coursework, so I only audited **Topics in High
Dimensional Statistics**, taught by [Alessandro
Rinaldo](http://www.stat.cmu.edu/~arinaldo/) as a pair of half-semester
courses ([36-788](http://stat.cmu.edu/~arinaldo/36788/) and
[36-789](http://stat.cmu.edu/~arinaldo/36789/)). “High-dimensional” here
loosely means problems where you have more variables (p) than
observations (n). For instance, in genetic or neuroscience datasets, you
might have thousands of measurements each from only tens of patients.
The theory here is different than in traditional statistics because you
usually assume that p grows with n, so that getting more observations
won’t reduce the problem to a traditional one.

This course focused on some of the theoretical tools (like concentration
inequalities) and results (like minimax bounds) that are especially
useful for studying properties of high-dimensional methods. Ale did a
great job covering useful techniques and connecting the material from
lecture to lecture.

In the final part of the course, students presented recent
minimax-theory papers. It was useful to see my fellow students work
through how these techniques are used in practice, as well as to get
practice giving “chalk talks” without projected slides. I gave a talk
too, preparing jointly with my classmate [Lingxue
Zhu](http://www.stat.cmu.edu/people/students/lzhu1) (who is very
knowledgeable, sharp, and always great to work with!) Ale’s feedback on
my talk was that it was “very linear”—I hope that was a good thing? Easy
to follow?

Also, as in every other stats class I’ve had here, we brought up [the
curse of
dimensionality](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Curse_of_dimensionality)—meaning
that, in high-dimensional data, very few points are likely to be near
the joint mean. I saw a great practical example of this in a story about
[the US Air Force’s troubles designing fighter planes for the “average”
pilot](http://www.thestar.com/news/insight/2016/01/16/when-us-air-force-discovered-the-flaw-of-averages.html).

Teaching
========

I taught a data visualization course! Check out [my course materials
here](http://civilstat.com/2015/10/statistical-graphics-and-visualization-course-materials/).
There’ll be a separate post reflecting on the whole experience. But the
summer before, it was fun (and helpful) to binge-read all those dataviz
books I’ve always meant to read.

I’ve been able to repurpose my lecture materials for a few short talks
too. I was invited to present a one-lecture intro to data viz for [Seth
Wiener](http://www.andrew.cmu.edu/user/swiener/)‘s linguistics students
here at CMU, as well as for a seminar on Data Dashboard Design run by
[Matthew Ritter](http://www.olin.edu/faculty/profile/matthew-ritter/) at
my alma mater (Olin College). I also gave an intro to the Grammar of
Graphics (the broader concept behind `ggplot2`) for our [Pittsburgh useR
Group](http://www.meetup.com/Pittsburgh-useR-Group/events/227171102/).

Research
========

I’m officially working with [Jing
Lei](http://www.stat.cmu.edu/~jinglei/), still looking at sparse PCA but
also some other possible thesis topics. Jing is a great instructor,
researcher, and collaborator working on many fascinating problems. (I
also appreciate that he, too, has a young child and is understanding
about the challenges of parenting.)

But I’m afraid I made very slow research progress this fall. A lot of my
time went towards teaching the dataviz course, and plenty went to
parenthood (see below), both of which will be reduced in the spring
semester. I also wish I had some grad-student collaborators. I’m not
part of a larger research group right now, so meetings are just between
my advisor and me. Meetings with Jing are very productive, but in
between it’d also be nice to hash out tough ideas together with a fellow
student, without taking up an advisor’s time or stumbling around on my
own.

Though it’s not quite the same, I started attending the [Statistical
Machine Learning Reading Group](http://statml.cs.cmu.edu/) regularly.
Following these talks is another good way to stretch my math muscles and
keep up with recent literature.

Life
====

As a nice break from statistics, we got to see our friends [Bryan
Wright](http://www.bryanswright.com/wpdir/) and [Yuko
Eguchi](http://www.yukoeguchi.com/yuko/Home.html) both defend their PhD
dissertations in musicology. A defense in the humanities seems to be
much more of a conversation involving the whole committee, vs. the
lecture given by Statistics folks defending PhDs.

Besides home and school, I’ve been a well-intentioned but ineffective
volunteer, trying to manage a few pro bono statistical projects. It
turns out that virtual collaboration, managing a far-flung team of
people who’ve never met face-to-face, is a serious challenge. I’ve tried
reading up on advice but haven’t found any great tips—so please leave a
comment if you know any good resources.

So far, I’ve learned that choosing the right volunteer team is
important. Apparent *enthusiasm* (I’m eager to have a new project! or
even eager for this particular project!) doesn’t seem to predict
commitment or followup as well as apparent *professionalism* (whether or
not I’m eager, I will stay organized and get s\*\*t done).

Meanwhile, the baby is no longer in the “potted-plant stage” (when you
can put him down and expect he’ll still be there a second later), but
not yet in day care, while my wife is returning to part-time work. After
this semester, we finally got off the wait-lists and into day care, but
meanwhile it was much harder to juggle home and school commitments this
semester.

However, he’s an amazing little guy, and it’s fun finally taking him to
outings and playdates at the park and zoo and museums (where he stares
at the floor instead of exhibits… except for the [model
railroad](http://www.carnegiesciencecenter.org/exhibits/miniature-railroad/),
which he really loved!) We also finally made it out to
[Kennywood](https://www.kennywood.com/), a gorgeous local amusement
park, for their holiday light show.

Here’s to more exploration of Pittsburgh as the little guy keeps
growing!

</div>

<div class="entry-info">

This entry was posted in
[Education](http://civilstat.com/category/education/),
[Statistics](http://civilstat.com/category/statistics/). Bookmark the
[permalink](http://civilstat.com/2016/04/after-5th-semester-of-statistics-phd-program/ "Permalink to After 5th semester of statistics PhD program").

</div>

</div>

<div id="nav-below" class="navigation">

<div class="nav-previous">

[<span class="meta-nav">←</span> Tapestry 2016 conference: short stories
and
wrap-up](http://civilstat.com/2016/03/tapestry-2016-conference-short-stories-and-wrap-up/)

</div>

<div class="nav-next">

</div>

</div>

<div id="comments">

<div id="respond" class="comment-respond">

### Leave a Reply <span id="cancel-comment-reply-link">[Cancel reply](/2016/04/after-5th-semester-of-statistics-phd-program/#respond)</span> {#reply-title .comment-reply-title}

<span id="email-notes">Your email address will not be published.</span>
Required fields are marked <span class="required">\*</span>

Comment
Name <span class="required">\*</span>

Email <span class="required">\*</span>

Website

Notify me of follow-up comments by email.

Notify me of new posts by email.

</div>

</div>

</div>

</div>

<div id="primary" class="widget-area" role="complementary">

-   <div id="search-2">

    </div>

    <div>

    Search for:

    </div>

-   <div id="recent-posts-2">

    </div>

    ### Recent Posts {.widget-title}

    -   [After 5th semester of statistics PhD
        program](http://civilstat.com/2016/04/after-5th-semester-of-statistics-phd-program/)
    -   [Tapestry 2016 conference: short stories and
        wrap-up](http://civilstat.com/2016/03/tapestry-2016-conference-short-stories-and-wrap-up/)
    -   [Tapestry 2016 conference: overview and keynote
        speakers](http://civilstat.com/2016/03/tapestry-2016-conference-overview-and-keynote-speakers/)
    -   [Are you really moving to
        Canada?](http://civilstat.com/2016/03/are-you-really-moving-to-canada/)
    -   [Lunch with ASA president Jessica
        Utts](http://civilstat.com/2016/03/lunch-with-asa-president-jessica-utts/)
-   <div id="recent-comments-2">

    </div>

    ### Recent Comments {.widget-title}

    -   <span
        class="comment-author-link">[civilstat](http://civilstat.com)</span>
        on [Lunch with ASA president Jessica
        Utts](http://civilstat.com/2016/03/lunch-with-asa-president-jessica-utts/#comment-522410)
    -   <span class="comment-author-link">Sadiq</span> on [Lunch with
        ASA president Jessica
        Utts](http://civilstat.com/2016/03/lunch-with-asa-president-jessica-utts/#comment-522409)
    -   <span class="comment-author-link">Twinkal</span> on [About /
        Portfolio](http://civilstat.com/about/#comment-522401)
    -   <span class="comment-author-link">Rohan Dalmia</span> on [Stats
        Edu and
        Jobs](http://civilstat.com/stats-edu-and-jobs/#comment-522329)
    -   <span class="comment-author-link">[David
        Hagmann](http://www.dhagmann.com)</span> on [A year after *BASP*
        banned statistical
        inference](http://civilstat.com/2016/02/a-year-after-basp-banned-statistical-inference/#comment-522293)
-   <div id="archives-2">

    </div>

    ### Archives {.widget-title}

    Archives Select Month April 2016  (1) March 2016  (6) February
    2016  (1) January 2016  (1) December 2015  (1) November 2015  (4)
    October 2015  (3) September 2015  (1) August 2015  (1) July
    2015  (5) June 2015  (2) April 2015  (5) March 2015  (4) February
    2015  (1) December 2014  (1) October 2014  (1) August 2014  (2) July
    2014  (2) May 2014  (6) April 2014  (1) February 2014  (4) November
    2013  (1) October 2013  (1) August 2013  (2) July 2013  (1) April
    2013  (1) March 2013  (1) February 2013  (2) January 2013  (7)
    December 2012  (5) November 2012  (4) October 2012  (8) September
    2012  (4) August 2012  (1) July 2012  (4) June 2012  (4) May
    2012  (5) April 2012  (5) March 2012  (5) February 2012  (2) January
    2012  (1) December 2011  (1) November 2011  (3) August 2011  (4)

-   <div id="categories-2">

    </div>

    ### Categories {.widget-title}

    -   [Articles](http://civilstat.com/category/articles/)
    -   [Books](http://civilstat.com/category/books/)
    -   [Conferences](http://civilstat.com/category/conferences/)
    -   [Cooking](http://civilstat.com/category/cooking/)
    -   [Education](http://civilstat.com/category/education/)
    -   [Linguistics](http://civilstat.com/category/linguistics/)
    -   [MATLAB](http://civilstat.com/category/statistics/matlab/)
    -   [R](http://civilstat.com/category/statistics/r/)
    -   [SAS](http://civilstat.com/category/statistics/sas/)
    -   [Statistics](http://civilstat.com/category/statistics/)
    -   [Uncategorized](http://civilstat.com/category/uncategorized/)
    -   [Visualization](http://civilstat.com/category/visualization/)
-   <div id="linkcat-10">

    </div>

    ### Stats and Math {.widget-title}

    -   [Andrew Gelman](http://andrewgelman.com/)
    -   [John D. Cook](http://www.johndcook.com/blog/)
    -   [R-bloggers](http://www.r-bloggers.com/)
-   <div id="linkcat-11">

    </div>

    ### Teaching Math {.widget-title}

    -   [Ben Blum-Smith](http://researchinpractice.wordpress.com/)
    -   [Dan Meyer](http://blog.mrmeyer.com/)
    -   [Shawn Cornally](http://shawncornally.com/wordpress/)
-   <div id="linkcat-15">

    </div>

    ### CMU {.widget-title}

    -   [Alex Reinhart](http://www.refsmmat.com/)
    -   [Andrew Thomas](http://www.acthomas.ca/)
    -   [Cosma Shalizi](http://bactra.org/weblog)
    -   [Larry Wasserman](http://normaldeviate.wordpress.com/)
    -   [Lee Richardson](http://statisticalsignal.com/)
    -   [Nathan VanHoudnos](http://www.stat.cmu.edu/~nmv)
    -   [Nicolas Kim](http://kimolas.wordpress.com/)
    -   [Saman Amirpour Amraii](http://amraii.wordpress.com/blog/)
    -   [Sangwon (Justin)
        Hyun](http://curiousyoungstatistician.wordpress.com/)
    -   [Taylor Pospisil](http://minimallysufficient.github.io/)
    -   [Yen-Chi Chen](http://yenchic.wordpress.com/)
-   <div id="meta-2">

    </div>

    ### Meta {.widget-title}

    -   [Log in](http://civilstat.com/wp-login.php)
    -   [Entries RSS](http://civilstat.com/feed/)
    -   [Comments RSS](http://civilstat.com/comments/feed/)
    -   [WordPress.org](https://wordpress.org/ "Powered by WordPress, state-of-the-art semantic personal publishing platform.")

</div>

</div>

<div id="footer" role="contentinfo">

<div id="colophon">

<span class="generator-link">[Proudly powered by
WordPress.](http://wordpress.org/ "A Semantic Personal Publishing Platform")</span>
Theme: Coraline by [WordPress.com](https://wordpress.com/themes/).

</div>

</div>

</div>

<div style="display:none">

</div>
